When you initialize a repository a .git file is created in the file to show that it is now a git repository. You need to do this if you plan to make any commits in the file in the future. And we know how useful commits and version-control is!
The working directory is the current directory that the project is being worked on. The repository is the git directory that I have the option to commit, upload, clone. The staging area is an intermediate step between the two. It allows me to choose what files I think are important to put in the repository (worth saving, having version-control). In other words, it allows me to leave out files from the repository I think would be useless to commit.
I can use the staging area to make sure I have only one logical change per commit by adding to the staging area anytime I make one change. Then I commit. This is an easy way to make sure that I only have one logical change per commit.
Branches would help by allowing the user to add experimental features without worrying about how this may affect the master branch. A branch is useful because a branch may be grown, and have separate commits than the master branch. It organizes different versions/ separate options of the program.
Diagrams help you visualize the branch structure by allowing you to see what commits are in reach of the tip of the branches. It also allows you to see which commits will not be reachable by any tip of the branches. It is a nice way to visualize how the commits are related to each other and what the parent commits are for each tip of the branch.
The result of mergeing two branches together is two things. First the two branches are combined into a single commit. Second, the branch label of what was being merged into the current head is deleted.
Git's automatic merging follows an algorithm to merge two commits. As code can get very complicated, especially if two branches has moved far way from the common ancester. There may always be unexpected errors that may arise from automatic merging. Manual merging will make sure that the merge is proper and correct, however will take much longer.